[FEATURE] PromQL: Add experimental info function MVP (#14495)
prometheus/prometheus: docs/querying/functions.md

increases are tracked consistently on a per-second basis.

## `info()`

**This function has to be enabled via the [feature flag](../feature_flags.md#experimental-promql-functions) `--enable-feature=promql-experimental-functions`.**

For each time series in `v`, `info(v instant-vector, [data-label-selector string])` finds 
all `target_info` series with corresponding identifying labels (`instance` and `job`),
and adds the union of their data (i.e., non-identifying) labels to the time series.
`target_info`'s data labels correspond to OpenTelemetry resource attributes.
The optional second argument allows specifying through label matchers, which data labels
should be picked. Example: `{k8s_container_name=~".+"}`. Through this argument, you can
also specify the info series to consider, by providing a `__name__` label matcher, e.g.
`{__name__="target_info"}`. For the time being however, only `target_info` will be considered.
The set of time series set augmented with any matching info series labels gets returned.

In the future, `info` will recognize all info metrics, not just `target_info`, and also detect their 

> respective identifying labels.

Reviewer: Just to be clear, I don't mean to block anything if the team has already decided the future of info :)

> respective identifying labels.

Author: It basically refers to what @beorn7 said above:

> only works for target_info, not for info metrics in general, however we will define what an info metric is in the future; and only considers job and instance as identifying labels, however we will define what the identifying labels are in the future

It's very difficult to say at this point whether info metrics will be made obsolete by metadata support in the future, or whether it would make sense to improve support for them.

> respective identifying labels.

Reviewer 2: As said, this is an experiment to find out how useful the info function works for target_info. If it is promising, we can later experiment with how useful it is for the many already existing info metrics. And in parallel, we can see how metadata handling evolves. It can well be that we decide to not need the info function because we have solved the problem with metadata handling. It could also be that the info function is just the right way of accessing (some parts of the) metadata in a a way that is in line with the current Prometheus data model.

> respective identifying labels.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to make clearer what we try to accomplish with this experiment. And we cannot really assume that the reader has any idea what an identifying label and a data label is.

Maybe we start with how the function is supposed to work, and then describe the restriction in the current MVP.

I'll try to come up with a concrete suggestion tomorrow…

Author: As discussed with @beorn7 in person, I can try to come up with a better documentation myself.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, "tomorrow" was overly optimistic… It's still on my list to propose a text, but whoever gets here first should let the others know about their idea.

Author: Starting on it now, last week flew by.

Author: @beorn7 I rewrote the documentation, what do you think of the current revision, does it match what you have in mind? Do you want me to make any edits?

Reviewer 2: Still working through my backlog. I hope I'll get to this soon.

used primarily for human readability.  Use `rate` in recording rules so that
increases are tracked consistently on a per-second basis.

> ## `info()`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## `info()` (experimental)
```
 
 Perhaps something to add to all experimental functions?

Author: > Perhaps something to add to all experimental functions?

Could be, not sure :)

_The `info` function is introduced as an experiment where we try to improve UX
around including labels from [info metrics](https://grafana.com/blog/2021/08/04/how-to-use-promql-joins-for-more-effective-queries-of-prometheus-metrics-at-scale/#info-metrics).
The behavior of this function may change in future versions of Prometheus,
including its removal from PromQL. info has to be enabled via the 
[feature flag](../feature_flags.md#experimental-promql-functions) `--enable-feature=promql-experimental-functions`._

> `info(v instant-vector, [data-label-selector string])` finds, for each time 
> series in v, all info series with corresponding _identifying_ labels (more on
> this later), and adds the union of their _data_ (i.e., non-identifying) labels
> to the time series. The second, optional, argument is a collection of data
> label matchers that may be used to constrain which info series to consider
> and which data labels to pick from them.

Reviewer 2: We cannot type the 2nd argument as `string` because that would imply quotes. I would write `instant-vector` and then explain the restrictions in the text. (To avoid introducing the concept of an entirely new node type at this point. I would still argue we want to have a "real" instant-vector in the final version, but as discussed elsewhere, maybe not, and we can defer that decision to later.)

Suggestion with some tweaks:

```suggestion
`info(v instant-vector, [data-label-selector instant-vector])` finds, for each time 
series in `v`, all info series with matching _identifying_ labels (more on
this later), and adds the union of their _data_ (i.e., non-identifying) labels
to the time series. The second argument `data-label-selector` is optional.
It is not a real instant vector, but uses a subset of its syntax.
It must start and end with curly braces (`{ ... }`) and may only contain label matchers.
The label matchers are used to constrain which info series to consider
and which data labels to add to `v`.
```

> What we mean by identifying labels in this context is the subset that 
> identifies an info metric. The remaining info metric labels are considered
> "data" labels (i.e. non-identifying). The purpose of an info metric's 
> identifying labels is to connect it to regular (non-info) metrics. It's similar
> to foreign keys in SQL, that allow you to combine data spread across multiple
> tables. The data labels in practice encode metadata key value pairs, and are
> what one wants to add to query results (identifying labels are already 
> included).

Reviewer 2: I would not go too far astray and pull SQL into the game. Instead, let's better explain the semantics of info series identity.

Suggestion:

```suggestion
Identifying labels of an info series are the subset of labels that uniquely
identify the info series. The remaining labels are considered
_data labels_ (also called non-identifying). (Note that Prometheus's concept
of time series identity always includes _all_ the labels. For the sake of the `info`
function, we “logically” define info series identity in a different way than
in the conventional Prometheus view.) The identifying labels of an info series
are used to join it to regular (non-info) series, i.e. those series that have
the same labels as the identifying labels of the info series. The data labels, which are
the ones added to the regular series by the `info` function, effectively encode 
metadata key value pairs. (This implies that a change in the data labels 
in the conventional Prometheus view constitutes the end of one info series and
the beginning of a new info series, while the “logical” view of the `info` function is
that the same info series continues to exist, just with different “data”.)
```

> Before the `info` function, the solution to including info metric data labels
> in Prometheus queries has been to so-called "join" with the relevant info metric.
> Take the following example:

Reviewer 2: Suggestion for brevity:

```suggestion
The conventional approach of adding data labels is sometimes called a “join query”,
as illustrated by the following example:
```

```

> rate(http_server_request_duration_seconds_count[2m])
> * on (job, instance) group_left (k8s_cluster_name)
> target_info

Reviewer 2: Canonical indentation:

```suggestion
  rate(http_server_request_duration_seconds_count[2m])
* on (job, instance) group_left (k8s_cluster_name)
  target_info
```

```

The core of the query is the expression `rate(http_server_request_duration_seconds_count[2m])`.

> However, the resulting time series are joined with `target_info` (an info 
> metric) series that have the same `job` and `instance` labels (these are 
> identifying). When joining, the `k8s_cluster_name` label is picked from 
> `target_info` and added to the time series.

Reviewer 2: I would use a slightly different approach to explain the same thing:

```suggestion
But to add data labels from an info metric, the user has to use elaborate
(and not very obvious) syntax to specify which info metric to use (`target_info`), what the
identifying labels are (`on (job, instance)`), and which data labels to add
(`group_left (k8s_cluster_name)`).
```

> Writing queries like the above is rather tricky, and also doesn't insulate the
> user from possible "join conflicts". Join conflicts happen temporarily when
> non-identifying labels of an info metric change, without the old version of the
> metric getting marked as stale. In order to provide a better user experience,
> we have developed the `info` function. Using `info`, the preceding example can
> instead be written like so:

Reviewer 2: With my hints inserted above about series identity, we might be able to explain the "join conflicts" better.

```suggestion
This query is not only verbose and hard to write, it might also run into an “identity crisis”:
If any of the data labels of `target_info` changes, Prometheus sees that as a change of series
(as alluded to above, Prometheus just has no native concept of non-identifying labels).
If the old `target_info` series is not properly marked as stale (which can happen with certain ingestion paths),
the query above will fail for up to 5m (the lookback delta) because it will find a conflicting 
match with both the old and the new version of `target_info`.

The `info` function not only resolves this conflict in favor of the newer series, it also simplifies the syntax
because it knows about the available info series and what their identifying labels are. The example query
looks like this with the `info` function:
```

```
info(
  rate(http_server_request_duration_seconds_count[2m]),
  {k8s_cluster_name=~".+"}
)
```

By wrapping the core expression (`rate(http_server_request_duration_seconds_count[2m])`)
in an `info` call, combined with the data label matcher `k8s_cluster_name=~".+"`,
we also achieve the effect of joining the resulting time series with 
`target_info` on the `job` and `instance` labels, and picking the 

> `k8s_cluster_name` label from the latter.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this paragraph. It just explains what the reader already knows.

Author: Removed it.

> If the second argument to `info` (`{k8s_cluster_name=~".+"}`) is omitted, all
> of `target_info`'s data labels are instead picked.

Reviewer 2: Let's sell this better:

```suggestion
The common case of adding _all_ data labels can be achieved by
omitting the 2nd argument of the `info` function entirely, simplifying
the example even more:

```
info(rate(http_server_request_duration_seconds_count[2m]))
```
```

Reviewer 2: Hmgrmpf, GH renders code blocks within suggestions improperly, I hope you can se e what I mean.

Author: Applied your suggestion manually.

When using `info`, join conflicts are avoided by automaticaly picking the 

> newest series.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph isn't needed anymore with my suggestion above.

Author: Done.

> While `info` normally automatically finds info metrics, it's possible to

Reviewer 2: finds info metrics → finds all matching info series

Author: Done.

restrict them by providing a `__name__` label matcher, e.g.
`{__name__="target_info"}`.

### Limitations

In its current iteration, `info` defaults to considering only one info metric:
`target_info`. It also assumes that the identifying info metric labels are
`instance` and `job`. `info` does support other info metrics however, through
`__name__` label matchers. E.g., one can explicitly say to consider both 
`target_info` and `build_info` as follows:
`{__name__=~"(target|build)_info"}`. However, the identifying labels always

> have to be `instance` and `job`.

Reviewer 2: So far, we have been switching between "info series" and "info metrics". Maybe we should consistently use "info series". I have tried to do that in my suggestions above, so maybe let's do it here, too.

Author: I don't think consistently using "info series" always makes sense, since "info metric" refers to the "family" of series with the same name name, e.g. `target_info`. E.g. the following wording wouldn't be true, since there can be an indefinite number of `target_info` series:

> In its current iteration, `info` defaults to considering only one info series:

Author: Giving it some more thought, I could reword around the "series" term.

Author: PTAL.

> We hope to lift the above limitations at some point in the future, when 
> Prometheus is able to store metadata about info metrics.

Reviewer 2: Let's be more honest and at the same time more optimistic here, without going into too much technical detail:

```suggestion
These limitations are partially defeating the purpose of the `info` function.
At the current stage, this is an experiment to find out how useful the approach
turns out to be in practice. A final version of the `info` function will indeed
consider all matching info series and with their appropriate identifying labels.
```
